Variants: a-camallo-tetl, a-camollotetl  

## Subchapter 5e  
**Suppuration of roof of mouth and throat.** Suppuration of the roof of the mouth and throat is cured by the root of the [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), crushed together with the [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), white earth, small or sharp variegated stones that are gathered from a torrent, [a-camallo-tetl](a-camallo-tetl_v2.md), with Indian spikes poorly ground, the flowers of the [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md) and [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), of which the juice is well squeezed and promptly poured into the throat.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/30](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/30)  

## Subchapter 7d  
**For burning at the heart.** For heat at the heart take the juice from the root [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), white pearl, crystal, a very bright greenstone, beryl and the stone [xiuh-tomolli](xiuh-tomolli.md), with [a-camallo-tetl](a-camallo-tetl_v2.md) and sharp stones ground in water; this helps more.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/48](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/48)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl_v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac_oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 12a  
**Infantile skin eruptions.** Phthiriasis, or the skin breaking out on infants, is cured by anointing the body with a poultice made from the seeds of the well known [michi-huauhtli](Michi-huauhtli.md), red incense, grain, which are to be burned; then the plant [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), leaves of the [huitzitzil-xochitl](Huitzihtzil-xochitl.md), the root of the [tlal-ahuehuetl](Tlal-ahuehuetl.md) and [tla-yapaloni](Tla-yapaloni.md), laurel leaves, [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md) leaves from which the acid water is to be drawn; let the boy also drink medicine made from white earth, the small white stones gathered from the bottom in flowing water, the stone[a-camallo-tetl](a-camallo-tetl_v2.md) and [coltotzin](Coltotzin.md), the bush [tlal-mizquitl](Tlal-mizquitl.md), and points ground in water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/113](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/113)  

