Variants: chichiltic tapachtli  

## Subchapter 5c  
**Toothache.** Weak and decaying teeth are first to be punctured by a dead tooth. Then the root of the tall plant [teo-nochtli](Teo-nochtli.md) is to be ground up and burned with deer’s horn; these precious stones [iztac-quetzaliztli](iztac-quetzaliztli.md), [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic tapachtli.md) and a little poorly ground farina should be heated with salt; all these wrapped in a cloth are to be compressed on the teeth for a while, especially on those where the injury or trouble with the pain is felt severely. Finally white frankincense and the kind of ointment we call [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md) are burnt over the coals, with the odor whereof a coarse pad of cotton is impregnated, and then is kept moving frequently between the cheeks, so as best to reach the pain spot.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/28](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/28)  

## Subchapter 5h  
**For bloody saliva.** For one spitting blood it is well to drink a potion made out of the root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), our pepper, the stones [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl v2.md) and [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic tapachtli.md), the bones of an ape, the red flinty stones you find on the bank of a river, white frankincense, the leaves of the [huitz-colotli](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of other plants whose tip is ruddy and small, crushing them in the whites of two eggs. Further to prepare the potion you should crush one root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), the leaves of the [huitz-colo-xochitl](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of another plant called [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), the stone [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl v2.md) and the bone of an ape, burn pepper to ashes, crush together the [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic tapachtli.md) and a stone found in the river, that is, in water; cook the bone in water with white frankincense, and then before a meal let him take one saucer of the potion thus prepared, for his drink. For one who spits out yellow mucus, take the [malinalli](Malinalli.md) plant, pine cypress and leaves of the plant [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), squeezed in water or liquor containing ashes, or if it seems right in sour water; let the above be ground and cooked for a potion he is to drink; it is however to be diligently studied. This consumes the noxious humor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33)  

## Subchapter 7c  
**For pain at the heart.** For him whose heart pains him or burns, take the plant[nonochton](Nonochton azcapanixua.md) that grows near an ants’ nest, gold, electrum, [teo-xihuitl](Teo-xihuitl v1.md), [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic tapachtli.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), with the burned heart of a deer, and grind them up together in water; let him drink the liquor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/47](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/47)  

