Variants: ez-tetl, eztetl  

## Subchapter 1a  
**Curation of the head.** The fruit of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) plant, the [iztac oco-xochitl](Iztac_oco-xochitl.md), the [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), the precious stones the [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [iztac tlalli](iztac_tlalli.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [te-mamatlatzin](te-mamatlatzin.md), bruised up together in frigid water, allay heat in the head, and if in hot water an excess of cold. They are applied three times a day, morning, noon and evening, to be wrapped about the neck and throat over the supporting tendons and throat nerves. For pains in the head let him eat onions in honey, let him not sit in the sun, nor labor, nor enter the baths.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/7](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/7)  

## Subchapter 3a  
**On festering in the ears, and deafness or stoppage.** Festering in the ears will be helped the most by instilling the root of the [maza-yelli](Maza-yelli.md), seeds of the [xoxouhqui-patli](xoxouhca-patli.md) plant, some leaves of the [tlaquilin](Tlaquilin.md) with a grain of salt in hot water. Also the leaves of two bushes, rubbed up, are to be smeared below the ears; these bushes are called [tolova](Tolohua_xihuitl.md) and [tlapatl](Tlapatl.md); also the precious stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [tlacalhuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), xoxouhqui chalchi-huitl, with the leaves of the [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) tree macerated in hot water, ground together and put in the stopped up ears, willopen them.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/22](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/22)  

## Subchapter 5d  
**Overheated throat or pharynx.** The leaves of the [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), the [tlanexti](Tlanextia_xiuhtontli.md), with the root ofthe osiers called [tol-patlactli](Tol-patlactli.md), crushed in water, cool heat in the throat. With this is mixed the liquor of ground gold bronze or pyropus, and the stone [ez-tetl](eztetl.md), and then hold as much of this as can be, in the mouth inside the teeth, not passing it into the stomach.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/29](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/29)  

## Subchapter 8d  
**Difficulty in passing the urine.** Against difficulty in urination, a liquor prepared from the flowers [tetzmi-xochitl](Tetzmi-xochitl.md), [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md), the[mamaxtla](Mamaxtla.md) root, red earth and [eztetl](eztetl.md), white earth, drunk in water, will be of avail. Also place on the stomach a stone found in the stream, in which pearls (uniones) appear.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/60](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/60)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli_tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua_xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 8k  
**Against lassitude.** One fatigued will be restored if the feet be bathed in choice liquor, with the [ahuiyac-xihuitl](Ahuiyac-xihuitl.md) or [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the [huitzihtzil-xochitl](Huitzihtzil-xochitl.md)flower, and the stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [tlaca-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md) and [eztetl](eztetl.md), to be crushed in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66)  

## Subchapter 8l  
**The trees and flowers for relieving the fatigue of those administering the government, and discharging public offices.** The bark of the tree [quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the flowers [elo-xochitl](Elo-xochitl.md) and[izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), the almond with its fruit, which is the [tlapal-cacahuatl](Tlapol-cacahuatl.md), the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md), [meca-xochitl](Meca-xochitl.md), [huey-nacaztli](Huey-nacaztli.md), and all fine smelling summer flowers; leaves of the trees [a-ylin](A-illin.md), [oyametl](Oyametl.md), [ocotl](Ocotl.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tomazquitl](Tomaz-quitl.md), [ahuatl](Ahuatl.md), [tepe-ylin](Tepe-ylin.md), [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), and te-papaquilti quahuitl, flower bearing plants with their shrubbery, which you gather before the wind rises; these are expressed one by one in clear spring water, into new vessels or vases. This then stays for a day and a night, when the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) wood, with a red juice, is added as coloring. Also the blood of wild animals, namely the red ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), white ocelot, [tlaco-ocelotl](tlaco-ocelotl.md), is sought for. With this and the above liquors the body is well anointed. Second, the precious stones [quetzal-iztli](quetzal-iztli.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), red earth and the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [hauctli](huactli.md) and [apopotli](apopotli.md) are cast into water in which they stay for a night in order that the healthful juice may be drawn out, with which the body is to be frequently bathed. Third, the brain and gall of these animals, the red ocelot, white ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), [coyotl](coyotl.md), also the brain, gall and bladder of the white epatl, ground up; with these the body is moistened. These medicaments healthily give gladiatorial strength to the body, drive fatigue far off, and also cast out timidity and strengthen the human heart. As for the rest, let whoever wishes to follow through this reinvigoration of the body, eat other things also, but as of chief value the flesh of the white rabbit or white fox, either baked or boiled.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl_v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac_oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 9f  
**Remedy for lesions of the body.** Lesions caused by rough treatment should be treated with a poultice made from [tlazo-teo-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [xiuh-tontli](Xiuhtontli.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [tlayapaloni](Tla-yapaloni.md), [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), moss from some tree, cypress nuts, seeds of the nettle, and the tree [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md). Let the ill-treated one drink a broth carefully prepared from the root of the [coanenepilli](Coanenepilli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, [chicom-catl](Chicom-acatl.md), the flower of the [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md) and [izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), [tetlahuital](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), the blood of an aquatic bird, the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), and some [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) leaves, all of which are to be ground up in acidulous water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80)  

## Subchapter 10e  
**Against stupidity of mind.** Let one who is possessed of such a mind drink the crushed roots of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) in hot water, that he may vomit. A few days later let the roots and flowers of the [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md) and [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) be crushed in water, and let him drink the liquor before eating, wherewith the evil humor in the chest will be largely driven out. Third: let the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [xiuhquechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md) and [tlapa-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), the [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and pearl be ground together in water; after this divide the liquor into three parts, one of which he drinks and the second is at once poured on his head. Having done this, let him carry in his hands the stone found in the stomach of the [huactli](huactli.md) or night-owl together with its gall-bladder; with this and the drink he will come to himself and his sanity of mind be restored. Let his head also be anointed with the brain of a raven and a dove’s feathers crushed and put in water with human hairs. On his neck let him carry the stone found in a swallow’s stomach.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98)  

## Subchapter 11a  
**For recent parturition.** If the woman suffers difficulty in the bringing forth, then that she may give forth the fetus with little effort, let her drink medicines made from the bark of the tree[quauh-alahuac](Quauh-alahuac.md) and the plant [cihua-patli](Cihua-patli.md), the small stone [eztetl](eztetl.md), and the tail of the small animal called [tlaquatzin](tlaquatzin.md). Let her hold the plant [tlanextia](Tlanextia_xiuhtontli.md) in her hand. Also the hairs and bone of an ape, the wings of an eagle, the tree [a-huexotl](Quetzal-ahuexotl.md), the skin of a deer, gall of a cock, also of a hare, and onions put in the sun are to be burned together; to these are to be added salt, the fruit we call [nochtli](Nochtli.md), and the pulque we call [octli](octli.md). The above are to be heated and used for anointing. Let her eat the cooked flesh of a wolf, and greenstone together with bright green pearl be bound on her back. She may also drink the juice of ground up kite and goose flesh, and the tail of the tlaquauzin, in our sweet wine; also take the root of the [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), the tail of the [tlaquatzin](tlaquatzin.md), and leaves of the [cihua-patli](Cihua-patli.md), grind them up, and wet the womb. Also grind the tail of a suckling [tlaquatzin](tlaquatzin.md) in water, with the plant [cihua-patli](Cihua-patli.md), with which let the body be purged, it being given by a clyster.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/106](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/106)  

## Subchapter 11b  
**Menstrual blood.** The flow of blood is dried up and restricted by a poultice which you shall make of salt, ashes of a deer and a frog, white of egg, the hairs of a hare, the roots of the[ahuiyac-xihuitl](Ahuiyac-xihuitl.md) and willow, oak acorns and papyrus burned with deer’s horn, the stone [eztetl](eztetl.md), pure gold, iron scrapings, all which are to be strained in river water, and the liquor infused where the flow of blood is heavy. Take and amputate the head of a lizard, extract the viscera and hang this in a cold place until it dries; then burn it, and let her be anointed with the ashes, mixed in Indian wine and white honey.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/107](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/107)  

## Subchapter 11c  
**Ventral lotion in childbirth.** The womb of a woman entering childbirth is to be washed out with the juice of the plants [xiuh-eloquilitl](Xiuh-elo-quilitl.md), [tlaco-popotl](Tlaco-popotli.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [xiuhpatli](Xiuh-patli.md), laurel, all which triturate in spring water with the stones [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md). The feet are also to be frequently washed with this. When the birth is about to come, the [iztac huitz-quahuitl](Iztac_huitz-quahuitl.md), [malinalli](Malinalli.md), white stone, white nitre, pine, palm and [eztetl](eztetl.md) are to be boiled in water. Into the womb you also inject the triturated herb [ayo-nelhuatl](Ayo-nelhuatl.md), eagle excrement, the acidulous plants, the root [quauh-alahuac](Quauh-alahuac.md) and the stone [eztetl](eztetl.md), that the pain may be lightened.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/108](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/108)  

## Subchapter 13a  
**Of certain signs of approaching death.** The prudent physician will draw his auguries as to whether the patient is to die or get well, from the eyes and nose of the sick man. In his most likely opinion, ruddy eyes are without doubt the sign of life, palid and whitish of uncertain health. A mark of death is a sootiness found in the middle of the eyes, the crown of the head growing cold and contracting into a depression, eyes growing dark and seeing little, the nose getting thin and pointed like a rod, the cheeks growing stiff and the tongue cold, the teeth powdering and rather dirty, and no longer able to move themselves and open. Also ever the grinding of the teeth, and the blood that comes from an incised vein either pale or else black, announces the coming of death. Also the growing pale, or blackening, and putting on one or another visage, and finally the babbling of words without meaning or order, in the way of parrots. A special prognostic in a woman is observed, namely if the buttocks, calves and sides are as if punctured with some very sharp thorn. In spite of this desperate state, it is still possible to instill into the dying man’s eyes a medicine made of the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), pearl and white pearl, with white earth ground together in water. You may anoint the chest with pine wood crushed in water, laurel and the plant [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md), which you gather in the summer and keep for the occasion. Also puncture with a sharpened wolf’s bone, or an eagle’s bone, or that of a lion that is either white or spotted black in color, differently marked or sprinkled; to the nostrils you will hang the heart of an eagle covered or wrapped in deerskin. At the extreme point, give a drink made of the precious stones the white pearl, the very green pearl, greenstone, whitish earth, the moss from woodland rocks, and [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), which you grind up. Also from cypress nuts, which glow redly. Then the tree[quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the stones from the stomachs of the swift eagle, the quail, swallow, cock, diver-bird, [quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tlapal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [huitla-tototl](huitlalotl.md) and pigeon, which you shall grind up together. Then indeed when the fatal necessity is at hand, and we are at change of death, the blood pours over the heart in a flood and spreading through all the members, death is complete.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115)  

