Variants: hauctli, huactli  

## Subchapter 8l  
**The trees and flowers for relieving the fatigue of those administering the government, and discharging public offices.** The bark of the tree [quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the flowers [elo-xochitl](Elo-xochitl.md) and[izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), the almond with its fruit, which is the [tlapal-cacahuatl](Tlapol-cacahuatl.md), the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md), [meca-xochitl](Meca-xochitl.md), [huey-nacaztli](Huey-nacaztli.md), and all fine smelling summer flowers; leaves of the trees [a-ylin](A-illin.md), [oyametl](Oyametl.md), [ocotl](Ocotl.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tomazquitl](Tomaz-quitl.md), [ahuatl](Ahuatl.md), [tepe-ylin](Tepe-ylin.md), [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), and te-papaquilti quahuitl, flower bearing plants with their shrubbery, which you gather before the wind rises; these are expressed one by one in clear spring water, into new vessels or vases. This then stays for a day and a night, when the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) wood, with a red juice, is added as coloring. Also the blood of wild animals, namely the red ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), white ocelot, [tlaco-ocelotl](tlaco-ocelotl.md), is sought for. With this and the above liquors the body is well anointed. Second, the precious stones [quetzal-iztli](quetzal-iztli.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), red earth and the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [hauctli](huactli.md) and [apopotli](apopotli.md) are cast into water in which they stay for a night in order that the healthful juice may be drawn out, with which the body is to be frequently bathed. Third, the brain and gall of these animals, the red ocelot, white ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), [coyotl](coyotl.md), also the brain, gall and bladder of the white epatl, ground up; with these the body is moistened. These medicaments healthily give gladiatorial strength to the body, drive fatigue far off, and also cast out timidity and strengthen the human heart. As for the rest, let whoever wishes to follow through this reinvigoration of the body, eat other things also, but as of chief value the flesh of the white rabbit or white fox, either baked or boiled.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70)  

## Subchapter 9b  
**Fevers.** The face in marking fevers has various changes, at times flushed, at times darkened, again blanched. He also spits blood, the body jerks and turns hither and thither, he sees little. At times bitterness, now burning, now sweetness of a kind fills the mouth, or rather palate. One who is such certain has his stomach corrupted. Although the urine is whitish, unless you avert the danger quickly the medicine will be prepared too late. Wherefore you will help him wonderfully if you macerate the plants [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [teo-iztacuilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), [a-quiztli](Ahquiztli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, cuauhtla huita-quilitl, [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [tlazolco-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [mamaxtla-nelhuatl](Mamaxtla-nelhuatl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [zaca-matlalin](Zaca-matlalin.md), the bush [tlanextia quahuitl](Tlanextia quahuitl.md), the stones you find in the stomachs of these birds: the [huitlalotl](huitlalotl.md), [huactli](huactli.md), [aztatl](aztatl.md), [apopotli](apopotli.md), [tlacahuilotl](tlacahuilotl.md), [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [xiuh-quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tototl](tototl.md), [tlpal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [acatzanatl](acatzanatl.md), [zolin](zolin.md); the precious stones, fine green pearl, greenstone, sardonyx and [xiuh-tomolli](xiuh-tomolli.md), with burned human bone, from all which a liquor is to be heated quickly and then drunk. This potion being prepared, the stone [texalli](texalli.md) is ground in water, and a part of the liquor poured on his head, his feet bathed with a part, and the throat moistened with part. Also let him drink some. Then these plants are to be crushed in bitter water, the [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [tzom-pachtin](Tzon-pachtzin.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), all of which are to be gathered in the fervent heat of the sun; then adding the willow and laurel and human bone, he is to be wet with their liquor. With this the tooth of a corpse is placed on the crown of the head. The plants [teco-xochiti-xihuitl](teco-xochiti-xihuitl.md) and [tlazol-patli](Tlazol-patli.md)are crushed in woman’s milk, and with this the occuput and nostrils are to be anointed; after all this is done, take heed that he smell a flower of some kind, and sleep during the day.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75)  

## Subchapter 10a  
**Epilepsy.** Against this, recently aroused, there will serve the small stones found in a hawk’s stomach, the bird [huactli](huactli.md) and the cock; with the root of the[quetzal-atzonyatl](Quetzal-atzonyatl.md), deer’s horn, whitish and also white incense, the hair of a corpse, the incinerated flesh of a mole shut in a jar, all which are to be well ground up in hot water. Let the man affected drink the liquor that he may vomit, before which it should be well for him to drink of the crushed root of the bush called [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md). Observe the time when the epilepsy is to come on, for then the epileptic is to be instantly raised and the cartilage and sides punctured. Arising let him drink camnum gall, at the same time the head is given a poultice made of the [quetzal-atzo-yatl](Quetzal-atzonyatl.md) and [te-tzilin](Te-tzitzilin.md) leaves, and the herb or bush [acoco-xihuitl](Acoco-xihuitl.md), all ground up in water. Let him eat the brain of a wolf and a weasel, boiled. Also fumigation with the odor of a mouse’s nest consumed over the coals, whitish incense and the feathers of a vulture.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/94](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/94)  

## Subchapter 10e  
**Against stupidity of mind.** Let one who is possessed of such a mind drink the crushed roots of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) in hot water, that he may vomit. A few days later let the roots and flowers of the [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md) and [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) be crushed in water, and let him drink the liquor before eating, wherewith the evil humor in the chest will be largely driven out. Third: let the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [xiuhquechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md) and [tlapa-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), the [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and pearl be ground together in water; after this divide the liquor into three parts, one of which he drinks and the second is at once poured on his head. Having done this, let him carry in his hands the stone found in the stomach of the [huactli](huactli.md) or night-owl together with its gall-bladder; with this and the drink he will come to himself and his sanity of mind be restored. Let his head also be anointed with the brain of a raven and a dove’s feathers crushed and put in water with human hairs. On his neck let him carry the stone found in a swallow’s stomach.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98)  

