Variants: huexo-canauhtli  

## Subchapter 8l  
**The trees and flowers for relieving the fatigue of those administering the government, and discharging public offices.** The bark of the tree [quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the flowers [elo-xochitl](Elo-xochitl.md) and[izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), the almond with its fruit, which is the [tlapal-cacahuatl](Tlapol-cacahuatl.md), the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md), [meca-xochitl](Meca-xochitl.md), [huey-nacaztli](Huey-nacaztli.md), and all fine smelling summer flowers; leaves of the trees [a-ylin](A-illin.md), [oyametl](Oyametl.md), [ocotl](Ocotl.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tomazquitl](Tomaz-quitl.md), [ahuatl](Ahuatl.md), [tepe-ylin](Tepe-ylin.md), [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), and te-papaquilti quahuitl, flower bearing plants with their shrubbery, which you gather before the wind rises; these are expressed one by one in clear spring water, into new vessels or vases. This then stays for a day and a night, when the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) wood, with a red juice, is added as coloring. Also the blood of wild animals, namely the red ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), white ocelot, [tlaco-ocelotl](tlaco-ocelotl.md), is sought for. With this and the above liquors the body is well anointed. Second, the precious stones [quetzal-iztli](quetzal-iztli.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), red earth and the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [hauctli](huactli.md) and [apopotli](apopotli.md) are cast into water in which they stay for a night in order that the healthful juice may be drawn out, with which the body is to be frequently bathed. Third, the brain and gall of these animals, the red ocelot, white ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), [coyotl](coyotl.md), also the brain, gall and bladder of the white epatl, ground up; with these the body is moistened. These medicaments healthily give gladiatorial strength to the body, drive fatigue far off, and also cast out timidity and strengthen the human heart. As for the rest, let whoever wishes to follow through this reinvigoration of the body, eat other things also, but as of chief value the flesh of the white rabbit or white fox, either baked or boiled.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70)  

## Subchapter 9b  
**Fevers.** The face in marking fevers has various changes, at times flushed, at times darkened, again blanched. He also spits blood, the body jerks and turns hither and thither, he sees little. At times bitterness, now burning, now sweetness of a kind fills the mouth, or rather palate. One who is such certain has his stomach corrupted. Although the urine is whitish, unless you avert the danger quickly the medicine will be prepared too late. Wherefore you will help him wonderfully if you macerate the plants [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [teo-iztacuilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), [a-quiztli](Ahquiztli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, cuauhtla huita-quilitl, [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [tlazolco-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [mamaxtla-nelhuatl](Mamaxtla-nelhuatl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [zaca-matlalin](Zaca-matlalin.md), the bush [tlanextia quahuitl](Tlanextia quahuitl.md), the stones you find in the stomachs of these birds: the [huitlalotl](huitlalotl.md), [huactli](huactli.md), [aztatl](aztatl.md), [apopotli](apopotli.md), [tlacahuilotl](tlacahuilotl.md), [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [xiuh-quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tototl](tototl.md), [tlpal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [acatzanatl](acatzanatl.md), [zolin](zolin.md); the precious stones, fine green pearl, greenstone, sardonyx and [xiuh-tomolli](xiuh-tomolli.md), with burned human bone, from all which a liquor is to be heated quickly and then drunk. This potion being prepared, the stone [texalli](texalli.md) is ground in water, and a part of the liquor poured on his head, his feet bathed with a part, and the throat moistened with part. Also let him drink some. Then these plants are to be crushed in bitter water, the [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [tzom-pachtin](Tzon-pachtzin.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), all of which are to be gathered in the fervent heat of the sun; then adding the willow and laurel and human bone, he is to be wet with their liquor. With this the tooth of a corpse is placed on the crown of the head. The plants [teco-xochiti-xihuitl](teco-xochiti-xihuitl.md) and [tlazol-patli](Tlazol-patli.md)are crushed in woman’s milk, and with this the occuput and nostrils are to be anointed; after all this is done, take heed that he smell a flower of some kind, and sleep during the day.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 9f  
**Remedy for lesions of the body.** Lesions caused by rough treatment should be treated with a poultice made from [tlazo-teo-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [xiuh-tontli](Xiuhtontli.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [tlayapaloni](Tla-yapaloni.md), [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), moss from some tree, cypress nuts, seeds of the nettle, and the tree [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md). Let the ill-treated one drink a broth carefully prepared from the root of the [coanenepilli](Coanenepilli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, [chicom-catl](Chicom-acatl.md), the flower of the [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md) and [izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), [tetlahuital](tetlahuitl v2.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), the blood of an aquatic bird, the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), and some [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) leaves, all of which are to be ground up in acidulous water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80)  

