Variants: itzcuin-patli, itzcuinpatli, itzquin-patli  

## Subchapter 7b  
**For pain in the chest.** Pain in the chest is relieved by the plants [tetlahuitl](Tetlahuitl_v1.md)and [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md)growing on a rock, together with the stone [tlacahuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), and red and white earth triturated in water; the skin of a lion is also to be burned and its broth drunk; the chest is to be rubbed with the juice expressed from the herb [tzitzicton](Tzitzicton.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [ayauhtli](Ayauhtli.md), cypress seeds or nuts, and the [itzcuinpatli](Itzquin-patli.md)with the [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md) and [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46)  

## Subchapter 8f  
**Gout.** One with gout can be cured in this way: the bush [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), the leaves of the cypress and laurel, are thrown in an ants’ ditch where ants go to and fro, or are sprinkled as a lotion. Then the leaves of the bush [quappo-quietl](Quappo-quietl.md), leaves and bark of the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), leaves of the [quetzal-mizquitl](Quetzal-misquitl.md), tla-que quetzal and [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), the flowers of any plant, a small white or red stone, the plant called [itzquin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), pine, an oyster shell ground up in hare’s blood, small foxes, serpentine rabbits (? for burrowing moles), [eca-cohuatl](eca-cohuatl.md), lizards; pearl, greenstone and bloodstone are to be ground up in water. If the foot is troubled with much heat, let it be soaked in the cold liquor; if it is chilled over the instep, it is to be heated. To the above named you also add a yellow-colored flint, and the flesh and excrement of a fox, which you must burn to a crisp.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/62](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/62)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli_tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua_xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 8k  
**Against lassitude.** One fatigued will be restored if the feet be bathed in choice liquor, with the [ahuiyac-xihuitl](Ahuiyac-xihuitl.md) or [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the [huitzihtzil-xochitl](Huitzihtzil-xochitl.md)flower, and the stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [tlaca-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md) and [eztetl](eztetl.md), to be crushed in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66)  

