Variants: iztauh-yatl, iztauh-yattl, iztauhyatl, iztauhyauh  

## Subchapter 6i  
**For lameness of the hands.** Lameness of the hands is helped by xoxouhca patli seeds, leaves of the [quetzal-xoxouhqui](xoxouhca-patli.md) and the herb [iztauh-yattl](Iztauyattl.md)crushed and boiled in water. In this liquor further the hands are to be put repeatedly and held a long while. After this bring on ants near whose nest a mouthful of meat or bread has been placed that they may congregate, and let him patiently allow the lame hands to be bitten by their mouth pincers. The hands are to be frequently soaked in the said liquor, and then wrapped in a napkin.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/43](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/43)  

## Subchapter 8e  
**Affections of the rectum.** Rectal affection is cured by the herbs [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), coyo-xihuitl tlaztalehualtic, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and the leaves of the herb [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md) ground together in hot water, with which remedy the part suffering pain is to be bathed; or they may also be poulticed, brought to mud thickness.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 8k  
**Against lassitude.** One fatigued will be restored if the feet be bathed in choice liquor, with the [ahuiyac-xihuitl](Ahuiyac-xihuitl.md) or [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the [huitzihtzil-xochitl](Huitzihtzil-xochitl.md)flower, and the stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), [tlaca-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md) and [eztetl](eztetl.md), to be crushed in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 9q  
**Those struck by lightning.** Let one struck by a thunderbolt drink a potion well prepared from leaves of trees, namely the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), [tepaquilti quahuitl](tepaquilti quahuitl.md), very green cypress, the bush [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the herbs[quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md) and [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md). But however the drink is to be given, let it be heated.  Let the body also be anointed with a plaster made of the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), huitbitzil xochitil, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and in addition all the plants upon which the lightning struck. A few days later lethim drink water into which white frankincense is thrown. The water is boiled with white and whitish incense, with the burned bones of a fox added. Also mix some Indian wine with the above. Afterwards you will instill into the nostrils a medicine made of white pearl, the root [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md), and all plants growing in a garden that has been burned over. Let also be suffumigated by white incense thrown upon the coals, the wax ointment we call [xochi-oco-tzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), and the good odor of the herb [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91)  

## Subchapter 10i  
**Lice on the head.** The medicament for this is the root of the bush [zozoyatic](Zozoyatic.md)ground in water of bitter taste, the herb [iztauhyatl](Iztauyattl.md), the fat of a goose, the incinerated head of a mouse, the twigs removed from a swallow’s nest, all which you must then triturate, and pour the medicament over the head.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/102](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/102)  

