Variants: papalo-quilitl  

## Subchapter 6a  
**Against the hiccups.** For the hiccups take the root of the bush cohuatli, leaves of the plant [mexix-quilitl](Mexix-quilitl.md), bark of the red pine, leaves of the aromatic [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) plant, grind them in water and boil them; when well boiled mix white honey and let him drink moderately. Throw white frankincense and [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md) on the coals, soaking a pad of cotton with the odor, and with which the chest is to be heated. Leaves of cypress also, with the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md) and [yyauhtli](Y-yauhtli.md), are to be macerated in water, with the heated liquor whereof the chest is to be rubbed.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/36](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/36)  

## Subchapter 7b  
**For pain in the chest.** Pain in the chest is relieved by the plants [tetlahuitl](Tetlahuitl v1.md)and [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md)growing on a rock, together with the stone [tlacahuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), and red and white earth triturated in water; the skin of a lion is also to be burned and its broth drunk; the chest is to be rubbed with the juice expressed from the herb [tzitzicton](Tzitzicton.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [ayauhtli](Ayauhtli.md), cypress seeds or nuts, and the [itzcuinpatli](Itzquin-patli.md)with the [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md) and [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46)  

## Subchapter 9q  
**Those struck by lightning.** Let one struck by a thunderbolt drink a potion well prepared from leaves of trees, namely the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), [tepaquilti quahuitl](tepaquilti quahuitl.md), very green cypress, the bush [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the herbs[quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md) and [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md). But however the drink is to be given, let it be heated.  Let the body also be anointed with a plaster made of the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), huitbitzil xochitil, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and in addition all the plants upon which the lightning struck. A few days later lethim drink water into which white frankincense is thrown. The water is boiled with white and whitish incense, with the burned bones of a fox added. Also mix some Indian wine with the above. Afterwards you will instill into the nostrils a medicine made of white pearl, the root [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md), and all plants growing in a garden that has been burned over. Let also be suffumigated by white incense thrown upon the coals, the wax ointment we call [xochi-oco-tzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), and the good odor of the herb [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91)  

## Subchapter 10f  
**Goaty armpits of sick people.** This evil smell is removed by anointing the body with the liquor of the herbs[ayauh-tonan-yxiuh](Ayauh-tonan-yxiuh.md), [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), the leaves being macerated in water; also the leaves of the pine and the flowers[oco-xochitl](Oco-xochitl.md), [tonaca-xochitl](Tonaca-xochitl.md), [totoloctzin](Totoloctzin.md)and sharp stones.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/99](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/99)  

