Variants: teo-amatl  

## Subchapter 9c  
**Haemorrhoids.** Against haemorrhoids the root of the herb [colo-mecatl](Colo-mecatl.md) helps greatly, since it draws away the bile if it be drunk in hot water, crushed up with honey. Second, the plant [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) that grows on the rocks must have the skin removed that the abundant milky juice may flow. Received then on cotton and put in the sun for a little while, it is to be drunk in moderation that the pale bile be drawn out. Then let a medicine be prepared from the skins of the plants [quauh-izqui-xochitl](Quauh-izqui-xochitl.md) and . . . . . . with salt, and ground in hot water; this will also draw the purulence from the abdomen and clear the intestines of the man. Before a meal let him kill a weasel and eat it quite alone with qdragon’s blood.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/77](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/77)  

## Subchapter 9d  
**Rectal swellings.** Oak-bark, that of the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) and of the [capolla-xipe-hualli](Capolla-xipehualli.md) and [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md) are macerated. With these is mixed the [tlapal-achiyotl](Tlapal-achiyotl.md) and the salve called in our language the [holli](Holli.md), the gall of a crow, root of the almond, bark of the [izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), leaves and bark of the texcal-amatl chichic. A potion is prepared from salt, nitre and ashes, which is to be heated or rather boiled. Bread soaked with honey is brought gently touching the swelling. If this ailment starts at the buttocks, well heated water should be injected in the anus, and it should also be bathed in [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) bark with honey. This then done, let the part affected by the swelling be frequently soaked with the juice of the [yamanqui-patli](Yamanqui_patli.md). The [tlal-quequetzal](Tlal-quequetzal.md) plant is to be crushed in hot water and the broth drunk.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/78](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/78)  

## Subchapter 9h  
**For recurrent disease.** Let one relapsing in sickness drink, before a meal, a little of the latex like milk, expressed from the [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md), that he may vomit. On the third or fourth day let him drink a potion formed from [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md) root, [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) and also [tlanexti-yxiuh](Tlanextia-yxiuh.md) root, ground up in tepid water. Third let him drink of the [cuecuetz-patli](Cuecuetz-patli.md) root crushed in our wine. Let him drink this as he enters the bath, and then on coming out be anointed with the liquor of ground [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) roots. The bowel should be twice cleared with a clyster, first with a liquor from [ohua-xocoyolin](Ohua-xoxocoyolin.md)root crushed in hot water, and this even though he partakes of some food; this healthful juice will throw out pus from the abdomen. The second time, a few days later, made of the intoxicating plant we call [piciyetl](Piciyetl.md), salt, our black pepper, and light colored pepper.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82)  

