Variants: tepe-chian  

## Subchapter 8e  
**Affections of the rectum.** Rectal affection is cured by the herbs [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), coyo-xihuitl tlaztalehualtic, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and the leaves of the herb [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md) ground together in hot water, with which remedy the part suffering pain is to be bathed; or they may also be poulticed, brought to mud thickness.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61)  

## Subchapter 8f  
**Gout.** One with gout can be cured in this way: the bush [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), the leaves of the cypress and laurel, are thrown in an ants’ ditch where ants go to and fro, or are sprinkled as a lotion. Then the leaves of the bush [quappo-quietl](Quappo-quietl.md), leaves and bark of the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), leaves of the [quetzal-mizquitl](Quetzal-misquitl.md), tla-que quetzal and [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), the flowers of any plant, a small white or red stone, the plant called [itzquin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), pine, an oyster shell ground up in hare’s blood, small foxes, serpentine rabbits (? for burrowing moles), [eca-cohuatl](eca-cohuatl.md), lizards; pearl, greenstone and bloodstone are to be ground up in water. If the foot is troubled with much heat, let it be soaked in the cold liquor; if it is chilled over the instep, it is to be heated. To the above named you also add a yellow-colored flint, and the flesh and excrement of a fox, which you must burn to a crisp.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/62](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/62)  

## Subchapter 8g  
**Pain in the knees.** When the knees pain one, anoint them with the liquor of the plants [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [xoxouhca-patli](xoxouhca-patli.md) macerated with the [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md) in swallow's blood.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/63](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/63)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 9b  
**Fevers.** The face in marking fevers has various changes, at times flushed, at times darkened, again blanched. He also spits blood, the body jerks and turns hither and thither, he sees little. At times bitterness, now burning, now sweetness of a kind fills the mouth, or rather palate. One who is such certain has his stomach corrupted. Although the urine is whitish, unless you avert the danger quickly the medicine will be prepared too late. Wherefore you will help him wonderfully if you macerate the plants [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [teo-iztacuilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), [a-quiztli](Ahquiztli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, cuauhtla huita-quilitl, [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [tlazolco-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [mamaxtla-nelhuatl](Mamaxtla-nelhuatl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [zaca-matlalin](Zaca-matlalin.md), the bush [tlanextia quahuitl](Tlanextia quahuitl.md), the stones you find in the stomachs of these birds: the [huitlalotl](huitlalotl.md), [huactli](huactli.md), [aztatl](aztatl.md), [apopotli](apopotli.md), [tlacahuilotl](tlacahuilotl.md), [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [xiuh-quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tototl](tototl.md), [tlpal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [acatzanatl](acatzanatl.md), [zolin](zolin.md); the precious stones, fine green pearl, greenstone, sardonyx and [xiuh-tomolli](xiuh-tomolli.md), with burned human bone, from all which a liquor is to be heated quickly and then drunk. This potion being prepared, the stone [texalli](texalli.md) is ground in water, and a part of the liquor poured on his head, his feet bathed with a part, and the throat moistened with part. Also let him drink some. Then these plants are to be crushed in bitter water, the [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [tzom-pachtin](Tzon-pachtzin.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), all of which are to be gathered in the fervent heat of the sun; then adding the willow and laurel and human bone, he is to be wet with their liquor. With this the tooth of a corpse is placed on the crown of the head. The plants [teco-xochiti-xihuitl](teco-xochiti-xihuitl.md) and [tlazol-patli](Tlazol-patli.md)are crushed in woman’s milk, and with this the occuput and nostrils are to be anointed; after all this is done, take heed that he smell a flower of some kind, and sleep during the day.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75)  

## Subchapter 9g  
**For ringworm and tetter.** For one laboring with this scaly disease, let there be ground together and set over coals the bark of the cherry, of the incense bearing[quauh-xiyotl](Quauh-xiyotl.md) tree, the apple, the flowers of the [topozan](Topozan.md) and [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), oak roots, cypress nuts, leaves of the plants[tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), [quauh-yayahual](Quauh-yayahual.md), the herbs [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [a-quahuitl](A-quahuitl.md), cedar nuts and leaves; with these when heated let him bathe himself, and the affected part be rubbed with the burned pine, with which, and all the above, let him be rubbed.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/81](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/81)  

