Variants: tlaco-xilo-xochitl  

## Subchapter 5h  
**For bloody saliva.** For one spitting blood it is well to drink a potion made out of the root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), our pepper, the stones [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl_v2.md) and [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic_tapachtli.md), the bones of an ape, the red flinty stones you find on the bank of a river, white frankincense, the leaves of the [huitz-colotli](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of other plants whose tip is ruddy and small, crushing them in the whites of two eggs. Further to prepare the potion you should crush one root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), the leaves of the [huitz-colo-xochitl](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of another plant called [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), the stone [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl_v2.md) and the bone of an ape, burn pepper to ashes, crush together the [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic_tapachtli.md) and a stone found in the river, that is, in water; cook the bone in water with white frankincense, and then before a meal let him take one saucer of the potion thus prepared, for his drink. For one who spits out yellow mucus, take the [malinalli](Malinalli.md) plant, pine cypress and leaves of the plant [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), squeezed in water or liquor containing ashes, or if it seems right in sour water; let the above be ground and cooked for a potion he is to drink; it is however to be diligently studied. This consumes the noxious humor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33)  

## Subchapter 6b  
**For a cough.** If one is troubled by a cough, let him forthwith sip the boiled liquor of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md) root skinned and ground up in water; using a part of this, with honey, to anoint the throat. If he spits blood also, let him take the same liquor as a drink before meals. It would help if he gnawed and chewed some of the said root, with honey. The root of the herb called [tzopelica-cococ](Tzopelica-cococ.md), ground in tepid water is also of value for one with a cough; let him either drink the liquor or gnaw the root.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/37](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/37)  

## Subchapter 9d  
**Rectal swellings.** Oak-bark, that of the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) and of the [capolla-xipe-hualli](Capolla-xipehualli.md) and [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md) are macerated. With these is mixed the [tlapal-achiyotl](Tlapal-achiyotl.md) and the salve called in our language the [holli](Holli.md), the gall of a crow, root of the almond, bark of the [izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), leaves and bark of the texcal-amatl chichic. A potion is prepared from salt, nitre and ashes, which is to be heated or rather boiled. Bread soaked with honey is brought gently touching the swelling. If this ailment starts at the buttocks, well heated water should be injected in the anus, and it should also be bathed in [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) bark with honey. This then done, let the part affected by the swelling be frequently soaked with the juice of the [yamanqui-patli](Yamanqui_patli.md). The [tlal-quequetzal](Tlal-quequetzal.md) plant is to be crushed in hot water and the broth drunk.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/78](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/78)  

