Variants: tlaca-huatzin, tlacahuatzin, tlacal-huatzin, tlacalhuatzin  

## Subchapter 1f  
**For a broken head.** The break is to be smeared with plants growing in summer dew, with green-stone, pearls, crystal and the [tlacalhuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), and with wormy earth, ground up in the blood from a bruised vein and the white of egg; if the blood cannot be had, burned frogs will take the place.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/12](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/12)  

## Subchapter 2b  
**Overheated eyes.** Into eyes much heated from sickness the ground root of this bush is instilled; let the face be further wiped with the squeezed juice of the bushes [oco-xochitl](Oco-xochitl.md), [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md), [matlal-xochitl](Matlal-xochitl.md)and [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md). Slightly troubled eyes are helped by the leaves of the [mizquitl](Mizquitl.md) tree and of the xoxouhqui [matlal-xochitl](Matlal-xochitl.md), macerated in woman’s milk, or dew, or limpid water, and instilled. One suffering from a defect of the eyes should abstain from sexual acts, the heat of the sun, smoke and wind, not use [chilmolli](chilmolli.md) as a sauce in his food, not eat hot foods. On his neck he must carry a red crystal, and not look at white things but black. The eye of a fox will help vitiated eyes wonderfully, being bound on the upper arm. If the eyes are so hurt that they look pulled out, pearls, reddish crystal, red mussels, the stone foundin the small bird called [molo-tototl](molo-tototl.md), the stone [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), and the stone in the stomach of the Indian dove, ground up in goose’s grease, woman’s milk and spring water, should be taken; the juice thus prepared you shall instill into the effused eyes. When then something falls into the eyes, so that they fester from it, there should be instilled liquor prepared from ground siliqua or pulse, salt and flour, in spring water. If however the trouble comes from chill, it will be corrected if reddish crystal be ground in Indian wine and the liquor dropped in the eyes.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/14](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/14)  

## Subchapter 3a  
**On festering in the ears, and deafness or stoppage.** Festering in the ears will be helped the most by instilling the root of the [maza-yelli](Maza-yelli.md), seeds of the [xoxouhqui-patli](xoxouhca-patli.md) plant, some leaves of the [tlaquilin](Tlaquilin.md) with a grain of salt in hot water. Also the leaves of two bushes, rubbed up, are to be smeared below the ears; these bushes are called [tolova](Tolohua xihuitl.md) and [tlapatl](Tlapatl.md); also the precious stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), [tlacalhuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), xoxouhqui chalchi-huitl, with the leaves of the [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) tree macerated in hot water, ground together and put in the stopped up ears, willopen them.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/22](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/22)  

## Subchapter 7b  
**For pain in the chest.** Pain in the chest is relieved by the plants [tetlahuitl](Tetlahuitl v1.md)and [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md)growing on a rock, together with the stone [tlacahuatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), and red and white earth triturated in water; the skin of a lion is also to be burned and its broth drunk; the chest is to be rubbed with the juice expressed from the herb [tzitzicton](Tzitzicton.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [ayauhtli](Ayauhtli.md), cypress seeds or nuts, and the [itzcuinpatli](Itzquin-patli.md)with the [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md) and [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/46)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 8k  
**Against lassitude.** One fatigued will be restored if the feet be bathed in choice liquor, with the [ahuiyac-xihuitl](Ahuiyac-xihuitl.md) or [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), [tlatlaolton](Tlatlaolton.md), [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the [huitzihtzil-xochitl](Huitzihtzil-xochitl.md)flower, and the stones [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), [tlaca-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md) and [eztetl](eztetl.md), to be crushed in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/66)  

## Subchapter 8l  
**The trees and flowers for relieving the fatigue of those administering the government, and discharging public offices.** The bark of the tree [quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the flowers [elo-xochitl](Elo-xochitl.md) and[izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), the almond with its fruit, which is the [tlapal-cacahuatl](Tlapol-cacahuatl.md), the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md), [meca-xochitl](Meca-xochitl.md), [huey-nacaztli](Huey-nacaztli.md), and all fine smelling summer flowers; leaves of the trees [a-ylin](A-illin.md), [oyametl](Oyametl.md), [ocotl](Ocotl.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), [tlaco-izqui-xochitl](Tlaco-izqui-xochitl.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tomazquitl](Tomaz-quitl.md), [ahuatl](Ahuatl.md), [tepe-ylin](Tepe-ylin.md), [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), and te-papaquilti quahuitl, flower bearing plants with their shrubbery, which you gather before the wind rises; these are expressed one by one in clear spring water, into new vessels or vases. This then stays for a day and a night, when the [huitz-quahuitl](Huitz-quahuitl.md) wood, with a red juice, is added as coloring. Also the blood of wild animals, namely the red ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), white ocelot, [tlaco-ocelotl](tlaco-ocelotl.md), is sought for. With this and the above liquors the body is well anointed. Second, the precious stones [quetzal-iztli](quetzal-iztli.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), red earth and the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [hauctli](huactli.md) and [apopotli](apopotli.md) are cast into water in which they stay for a night in order that the healthful juice may be drawn out, with which the body is to be frequently bathed. Third, the brain and gall of these animals, the red ocelot, white ocelot, [cuetlachtli](cuetlachtli.md), [miztli](miztli.md), [ocotochtli](ocotochtli.md), [coyotl](coyotl.md), also the brain, gall and bladder of the white epatl, ground up; with these the body is moistened. These medicaments healthily give gladiatorial strength to the body, drive fatigue far off, and also cast out timidity and strengthen the human heart. As for the rest, let whoever wishes to follow through this reinvigoration of the body, eat other things also, but as of chief value the flesh of the white rabbit or white fox, either baked or boiled.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/70)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 10e  
**Against stupidity of mind.** Let one who is possessed of such a mind drink the crushed roots of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) in hot water, that he may vomit. A few days later let the roots and flowers of the [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md) and [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) be crushed in water, and let him drink the liquor before eating, wherewith the evil humor in the chest will be largely driven out. Third: let the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [xiuhquechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md) and [tlapa-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), the [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and pearl be ground together in water; after this divide the liquor into three parts, one of which he drinks and the second is at once poured on his head. Having done this, let him carry in his hands the stone found in the stomach of the [huactli](huactli.md) or night-owl together with its gall-bladder; with this and the drink he will come to himself and his sanity of mind be restored. Let his head also be anointed with the brain of a raven and a dove’s feathers crushed and put in water with human hairs. On his neck let him carry the stone found in a swallow’s stomach.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98)  

## Subchapter 13a  
**Of certain signs of approaching death.** The prudent physician will draw his auguries as to whether the patient is to die or get well, from the eyes and nose of the sick man. In his most likely opinion, ruddy eyes are without doubt the sign of life, palid and whitish of uncertain health. A mark of death is a sootiness found in the middle of the eyes, the crown of the head growing cold and contracting into a depression, eyes growing dark and seeing little, the nose getting thin and pointed like a rod, the cheeks growing stiff and the tongue cold, the teeth powdering and rather dirty, and no longer able to move themselves and open. Also ever the grinding of the teeth, and the blood that comes from an incised vein either pale or else black, announces the coming of death. Also the growing pale, or blackening, and putting on one or another visage, and finally the babbling of words without meaning or order, in the way of parrots. A special prognostic in a woman is observed, namely if the buttocks, calves and sides are as if punctured with some very sharp thorn. In spite of this desperate state, it is still possible to instill into the dying man’s eyes a medicine made of the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), pearl and white pearl, with white earth ground together in water. You may anoint the chest with pine wood crushed in water, laurel and the plant [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), which you gather in the summer and keep for the occasion. Also puncture with a sharpened wolf’s bone, or an eagle’s bone, or that of a lion that is either white or spotted black in color, differently marked or sprinkled; to the nostrils you will hang the heart of an eagle covered or wrapped in deerskin. At the extreme point, give a drink made of the precious stones the white pearl, the very green pearl, greenstone, whitish earth, the moss from woodland rocks, and [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), which you grind up. Also from cypress nuts, which glow redly. Then the tree[quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the stones from the stomachs of the swift eagle, the quail, swallow, cock, diver-bird, [quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tlapal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [huitla-tototl](huitlalotl.md) and pigeon, which you shall grind up together. Then indeed when the fatal necessity is at hand, and we are at change of death, the blood pours over the heart in a flood and spreading through all the members, death is complete.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115)  

