Variants: tlanexti-yxiuh  

## Subchapter 9h  
**For recurrent disease.** Let one relapsing in sickness drink, before a meal, a little of the latex like milk, expressed from the [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md), that he may vomit. On the third or fourth day let him drink a potion formed from [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md) root, [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) and also [tlanexti-yxiuh](Tlanextia-yxiuh.md) root, ground up in tepid water. Third let him drink of the [cuecuetz-patli](Cuecuetz-patli.md) root crushed in our wine. Let him drink this as he enters the bath, and then on coming out be anointed with the liquor of ground [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) roots. The bowel should be twice cleared with a clyster, first with a liquor from [ohua-xocoyolin](Ohua-xoxocoyolin.md)root crushed in hot water, and this even though he partakes of some food; this healthful juice will throw out pus from the abdomen. The second time, a few days later, made of the intoxicating plant we call [piciyetl](Piciyetl.md), salt, our black pepper, and light colored pepper.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82)  

## Subchapter 10d  
**Fear or timidity.** Let one who is fear-burdened take as a drink a potion made of the herb [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh_yxiuh_v1.md) which throws out the brightness of gold, the herb [tlanexti-yxiuh](Tlanextia-yxiuh.md), tetlahuitl and white earth that is to be sifted with river water; to these add the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and [tzacouh-xochitl](Tzacouh-xochitl.md); he should also have a poultice which you must prepare with the blood of a wolf and a fox, a worm, the blood and excrement of the acuecue-yalotl, laurel, swallow’s excrement ground upon water, and sea foam. One frightened by a thunderbolt or lightning is to be anointed by a liquor made from the struck tree, and the crushed leaves and all plants which grew near the place. But let the water used for sifting the unguent be of bitter flavor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/97](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/97)  

