Variants: tlatlacotic  

## Subchapter 6c  
**For swollen jaws.** Swollen jaws are helped by taking in water the juice of crushed [tememetla](Te-memetla.md) leaves, the pith of the [te-xiyotl](Te-xiyotl.md) and white earth, the liquor whereof is sub-acid, with the gummy twigs bearing the glutinous tears we call [nocheztli](Nocheztli.md). For those who cannot open the mouth the root of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) crushed in tepid water helps greatly; if he drinks this liquor, making him promptly vomit, the freed mucus will open the mouth.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/38](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/38)  

## Subchapter 7a  
**For harassing stricture of the chest.** When the chest is in some way constricted or drawn by any fulness, the root of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) is washed with hot water and then macerated. If so suffering pain, let him drink the juice in moderation; by this potion he will by vomiting get rid of what bound him.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/45](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/45)  

## Subchapter 9q  
**Those struck by lightning.** Let one struck by a thunderbolt drink a potion well prepared from leaves of trees, namely the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), [tepaquilti quahuitl](tepaquilti quahuitl.md), very green cypress, the bush [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the herbs[quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md) and [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md). But however the drink is to be given, let it be heated.  Let the body also be anointed with a plaster made of the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), huitbitzil xochitil, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and in addition all the plants upon which the lightning struck. A few days later lethim drink water into which white frankincense is thrown. The water is boiled with white and whitish incense, with the burned bones of a fox added. Also mix some Indian wine with the above. Afterwards you will instill into the nostrils a medicine made of white pearl, the root [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md), and all plants growing in a garden that has been burned over. Let also be suffumigated by white incense thrown upon the coals, the wax ointment we call [xochi-oco-tzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), and the good odor of the herb [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91)  

## Subchapter 10a  
**Epilepsy.** Against this, recently aroused, there will serve the small stones found in a hawk’s stomach, the bird [huactli](huactli.md) and the cock; with the root of the[quetzal-atzonyatl](Quetzal-atzonyatl.md), deer’s horn, whitish and also white incense, the hair of a corpse, the incinerated flesh of a mole shut in a jar, all which are to be well ground up in hot water. Let the man affected drink the liquor that he may vomit, before which it should be well for him to drink of the crushed root of the bush called [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md). Observe the time when the epilepsy is to come on, for then the epileptic is to be instantly raised and the cartilage and sides punctured. Arising let him drink camnum gall, at the same time the head is given a poultice made of the [quetzal-atzo-yatl](Quetzal-atzonyatl.md) and [te-tzilin](Te-tzitzilin.md) leaves, and the herb or bush [acoco-xihuitl](Acoco-xihuitl.md), all ground up in water. Let him eat the brain of a wolf and a weasel, boiled. Also fumigation with the odor of a mouse’s nest consumed over the coals, whitish incense and the feathers of a vulture.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/94](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/94)  

## Subchapter 10e  
**Against stupidity of mind.** Let one who is possessed of such a mind drink the crushed roots of the [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md) in hot water, that he may vomit. A few days later let the roots and flowers of the [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md) and [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) be crushed in water, and let him drink the liquor before eating, wherewith the evil humor in the chest will be largely driven out. Third: let the small stones in the stomachs of the birds [xiuhquechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md) and [tlapa-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), the [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl v2.md), the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and pearl be ground together in water; after this divide the liquor into three parts, one of which he drinks and the second is at once poured on his head. Having done this, let him carry in his hands the stone found in the stomach of the [huactli](huactli.md) or night-owl together with its gall-bladder; with this and the drink he will come to himself and his sanity of mind be restored. Let his head also be anointed with the brain of a raven and a dove’s feathers crushed and put in water with human hairs. On his neck let him carry the stone found in a swallow’s stomach.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/98)  

