Variants: tonatiuh yxiuh, tonatiuh-yxiuh  

## Subchapter 6f  
**For scrofulous tumors.** One scrofulous is relieved of the ailment if a plaster is applied to the neck, made of plants growing in a burned over thicket of bushes or reeds, the [tolova-xihuitl](Tolohua xihuitl.md), the [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), the root of the [tecpatl](Tecpatl.md), and the leaves of bramble bushes; crush these with the stone found in a swallow’s stomach, with his blood.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/41](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/41)  

## Subchapter 6g  
**For glandular or spongy swellings.** The tumors are to be cut with a small sword or knife, which done the matter is carefully cleared out, and a plaster applied to the cut. This then is to consist of the small plant [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md) that grows in the summer, and [tolohua](Tolohua xihuitl.md) leaves crushed in the yolk of an egg.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/42](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/42)  

## Subchapter 8e  
**Affections of the rectum.** Rectal affection is cured by the herbs [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), coyo-xihuitl tlaztalehualtic, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), and the leaves of the herb [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md) ground together in hot water, with which remedy the part suffering pain is to be bathed; or they may also be poulticed, brought to mud thickness.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/61)  

## Subchapter 9b  
**Fevers.** The face in marking fevers has various changes, at times flushed, at times darkened, again blanched. He also spits blood, the body jerks and turns hither and thither, he sees little. At times bitterness, now burning, now sweetness of a kind fills the mouth, or rather palate. One who is such certain has his stomach corrupted. Although the urine is whitish, unless you avert the danger quickly the medicine will be prepared too late. Wherefore you will help him wonderfully if you macerate the plants [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [teo-iztacuilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), [a-quiztli](Ahquiztli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, cuauhtla huita-quilitl, [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [tlazolco-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [mamaxtla-nelhuatl](Mamaxtla-nelhuatl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [zaca-matlalin](Zaca-matlalin.md), the bush [tlanextia quahuitl](Tlanextia quahuitl.md), the stones you find in the stomachs of these birds: the [huitlalotl](huitlalotl.md), [huactli](huactli.md), [aztatl](aztatl.md), [apopotli](apopotli.md), [tlacahuilotl](tlacahuilotl.md), [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), [xiuh-quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tototl](tototl.md), [tlpal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [acatzanatl](acatzanatl.md), [zolin](zolin.md); the precious stones, fine green pearl, greenstone, sardonyx and [xiuh-tomolli](xiuh-tomolli.md), with burned human bone, from all which a liquor is to be heated quickly and then drunk. This potion being prepared, the stone [texalli](texalli.md) is ground in water, and a part of the liquor poured on his head, his feet bathed with a part, and the throat moistened with part. Also let him drink some. Then these plants are to be crushed in bitter water, the [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [tzom-pachtin](Tzon-pachtzin.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), all of which are to be gathered in the fervent heat of the sun; then adding the willow and laurel and human bone, he is to be wet with their liquor. With this the tooth of a corpse is placed on the crown of the head. The plants [teco-xochiti-xihuitl](teco-xochiti-xihuitl.md) and [tlazol-patli](Tlazol-patli.md)are crushed in woman’s milk, and with this the occuput and nostrils are to be anointed; after all this is done, take heed that he smell a flower of some kind, and sleep during the day.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/75)  

## Subchapter 9e  
**Excessive heat.** The body when overheated is relieved by the ground roots of the [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), [xal-tomatl](Xal-tomatl.md), [tlaca-camotli](Tlaca-camotli.md), [teo-iztaquilitl](Teo-iztaquilitl.md), the stone [a-camollotetl](a-camallo-tetl v2.md), the [eztetl](eztetl.md), [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), red earth, white earth, and the stones found in the stomachs of a cock and the [noch-totl](noch-tototl.md), with sharp stones, all then put in water. This is drunk and the abdomen purged with a clyster. A potion is also prepared from [tzayanal-quilitl](Tzayanal-quilitl.md) roots, the [acacapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [tol-patlctli](Tol-patlactli.md), the bushes [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), [iztauhyauh](Iztauyattl.md), [huitz-quilitl](Huitz-quilitl.md), with added salt. The body is anointed with the latex squeezed from the [acapac-quilitl](Aca-capac-quilitl.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac oco-xochitl.md), [centzon-oco-xochitl](Centzon-oco-xochitl.md), which are herbs; also using the leaves of the laurel, the bush [tetzmitl](Tetzmitl.md), and the fruit trees [xa-xocotl](Xa-xocotl.md), the plant [cohua-xochitl](Cohua-xochitl.md), leaves of the pine. This medicine is then divided, some poured on the head, some that is quite thick is applied as ointment on the body. If the heat rises, take the blood of the [huitzitzilin](huitzitzilin.md), the gall of the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), the viscera of a quail, bladder of the [cocotli](cocotli.md), skin of the [pezotli](pezotli.md), burned together. These and the above are to be mixed together.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/79)  

## Subchapter 9h  
**For recurrent disease.** Let one relapsing in sickness drink, before a meal, a little of the latex like milk, expressed from the [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md), that he may vomit. On the third or fourth day let him drink a potion formed from [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md) root, [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) and also [tlanexti-yxiuh](Tlanextia-yxiuh.md) root, ground up in tepid water. Third let him drink of the [cuecuetz-patli](Cuecuetz-patli.md) root crushed in our wine. Let him drink this as he enters the bath, and then on coming out be anointed with the liquor of ground [teo-amatl](Teo-amatl.md) roots. The bowel should be twice cleared with a clyster, first with a liquor from [ohua-xocoyolin](Ohua-xoxocoyolin.md)root crushed in hot water, and this even though he partakes of some food; this healthful juice will throw out pus from the abdomen. The second time, a few days later, made of the intoxicating plant we call [piciyetl](Piciyetl.md), salt, our black pepper, and light colored pepper.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/82)  

## Subchapter 9o  
**Dyspepsia, or difficult digestion.** When any one by reason of overloading the stomach becomes constipated, give him cypress nuts, laurel leaves, the root of the plant [zaca-matlalin](Zaca-matlalin.md), the bark of the blackberry bush, the cherry and the [ylin](Ylin.md) tree, with the root of the [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), which is red as bright gold. Then crushed together in acid water let them be boiled with honey; the liquor drunk aids wonderfully in clearing the bowels.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/89](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/89)  

## Subchapter 10d  
**Fear or timidity.** Let one who is fear-burdened take as a drink a potion made of the herb [tonatiuh-yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md) which throws out the brightness of gold, the herb [tlanexti-yxiuh](Tlanextia-yxiuh.md), tetlahuitl and white earth that is to be sifted with river water; to these add the flowers [cacalo-xochitl](Cacalo-xochitl.md), [cacaua-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and [tzacouh-xochitl](Tzacouh-xochitl.md); he should also have a poultice which you must prepare with the blood of a wolf and a fox, a worm, the blood and excrement of the acuecue-yalotl, laurel, swallow’s excrement ground upon water, and sea foam. One frightened by a thunderbolt or lightning is to be anointed by a liquor made from the struck tree, and the crushed leaves and all plants which grew near the place. But let the water used for sifting the unguent be of bitter flavor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/97](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/97)  

## Subchapter 13a  
**Of certain signs of approaching death.** The prudent physician will draw his auguries as to whether the patient is to die or get well, from the eyes and nose of the sick man. In his most likely opinion, ruddy eyes are without doubt the sign of life, palid and whitish of uncertain health. A mark of death is a sootiness found in the middle of the eyes, the crown of the head growing cold and contracting into a depression, eyes growing dark and seeing little, the nose getting thin and pointed like a rod, the cheeks growing stiff and the tongue cold, the teeth powdering and rather dirty, and no longer able to move themselves and open. Also ever the grinding of the teeth, and the blood that comes from an incised vein either pale or else black, announces the coming of death. Also the growing pale, or blackening, and putting on one or another visage, and finally the babbling of words without meaning or order, in the way of parrots. A special prognostic in a woman is observed, namely if the buttocks, calves and sides are as if punctured with some very sharp thorn. In spite of this desperate state, it is still possible to instill into the dying man’s eyes a medicine made of the precious stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), pearl and white pearl, with white earth ground together in water. You may anoint the chest with pine wood crushed in water, laurel and the plant [tonatiuh yxiuh](Tonatiuh yxiuh v1.md), which you gather in the summer and keep for the occasion. Also puncture with a sharpened wolf’s bone, or an eagle’s bone, or that of a lion that is either white or spotted black in color, differently marked or sprinkled; to the nostrils you will hang the heart of an eagle covered or wrapped in deerskin. At the extreme point, give a drink made of the precious stones the white pearl, the very green pearl, greenstone, whitish earth, the moss from woodland rocks, and [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), which you grind up. Also from cypress nuts, which glow redly. Then the tree[quetzal-ylin](Quetzal-ylin.md), the stones from the stomachs of the swift eagle, the quail, swallow, cock, diver-bird, [quechol-tototl](xiuh-quechol-tototl.md), [tlapal-tototl](tlapal-tototl.md), [noch-tototl](noch-tototl.md), [huitla-tototl](huitlalotl.md) and pigeon, which you shall grind up together. Then indeed when the fatal necessity is at hand, and we are at change of death, the blood pours over the heart in a flood and spreading through all the members, death is complete.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/115)  

