Variants: xiuh-tontli, xiuhtontli  

## Subchapter 5h  
**For bloody saliva.** For one spitting blood it is well to drink a potion made out of the root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), our pepper, the stones [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl_v2.md) and [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic_tapachtli.md), the bones of an ape, the red flinty stones you find on the bank of a river, white frankincense, the leaves of the [huitz-colotli](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of other plants whose tip is ruddy and small, crushing them in the whites of two eggs. Further to prepare the potion you should crush one root of the [tlaco-xilo-xochitl](Tlaco-xilo-xochitl.md), the leaves of the [huitz-colo-xochitl](Huitz-colotli.md) and the root of another plant called [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), the stone [teo-xihuitl](teo-xihuitl_v2.md) and the bone of an ape, burn pepper to ashes, crush together the [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic_tapachtli.md) and a stone found in the river, that is, in water; cook the bone in water with white frankincense, and then before a meal let him take one saucer of the potion thus prepared, for his drink. For one who spits out yellow mucus, take the [malinalli](Malinalli.md) plant, pine cypress and leaves of the plant [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md), squeezed in water or liquor containing ashes, or if it seems right in sour water; let the above be ground and cooked for a potion he is to drink; it is however to be diligently studied. This consumes the noxious humor.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/33)  

## Subchapter 7i  
**Tumor of the stomach.** For a tumor of the abdomen or stomach, make a preparation from the leaves of the [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md) and the root of the [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), the [copaliyac-xiuhtontli](Copaliyac-xiuhtontli.md) and the alectorium or gem found in the maw of a cock, ground together in the finest Indian wine; also let him be given through the rectum a purge for the bowel made from the root of the [cococ-xiuhuitl](Cococ-xihuitl.md), Indian pepper, salt, nitre and the alectorium.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/52](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/52)  

## Subchapter 8a  
**Curation of the pubis.** When this part feels pain, let it be anointed with liquor expressed and prepared from the bark and leaves of the tree[macpal-xochitl](Macpal-xochitl.md), the thorny plants [tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua_xihuitl.md) and [xiuh-tontli](Xiuhtontli.md), Indian knives, flints, the fruit we call [te-tzapotl](Te-tzapotl.md) and the stone [te-xoxoctli](te-xoxoctli.md), ground up in the blood of a swallow, a lizard and a mouse. You must remember to heat this liquid. Also if a tumor or the pain burns severely, do not hesitate on section; the cut you must purify and anoint with a liquid drawn from the roots of the herb [tlal-huaxin](Tlal-huaxin.md), ground up in yolk of egg.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/57](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/57)  

## Subchapter 8h  
**Incipient contraction of the knees.** When the knees start to contract, anoint them with the juice of the plants [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md) or [tzitzicton](Tzitzicton.md), yamanqui te-xochitl, crushed in hawk’s blood and that of a bird called [huacton](huacton.md). Let the patient also enter the bath, and eat the cooked feet of the hawk, the huachtli, rabbit and hare. After that let the flesh of a very combative cock be boiled, which he shall eat, with some of it crushed as an ointment with goose grease. Let him abstain from sex converse, not avoid sleep, sleep sitting or supine, labor much, and not overheat.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/64](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/64)  

## Subchapter 9f  
**Remedy for lesions of the body.** Lesions caused by rough treatment should be treated with a poultice made from [tlazo-teo-zacatl](Tlazol-teo-zacatl.md), [centzon-xochitl](Centzon-xochitl.md), [xiuh-tontli](Xiuhtontli.md), [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md), [tlayapaloni](Tla-yapaloni.md), [xiuhtontli](Xiuhtontli.md), moss from some tree, cypress nuts, seeds of the nettle, and the tree [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md). Let the ill-treated one drink a broth carefully prepared from the root of the [coanenepilli](Coanenepilli.md), tlanextia xihuitl, [chicom-catl](Chicom-acatl.md), the flower of the [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md) and [izqui-xochitl](Izqui-xochitl.md), [tetlahuital](tetlahuitl_v2.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md), [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md), the blood of an aquatic bird, the [huexo-canauhtli](huexo-canauhtli.md), and some [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) leaves, all of which are to be ground up in acidulous water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/80)  

