Variants: xochi-oco-tzotl, xochi-ocotzotl  

## Subchapter 5c  
**Toothache.** Weak and decaying teeth are first to be punctured by a dead tooth. Then the root of the tall plant [teo-nochtli](Teo-nochtli.md) is to be ground up and burned with deer’s horn; these precious stones [iztac-quetzaliztli](iztac-quetzaliztli.md), [chichiltic tapachtli](chichiltic_tapachtli.md) and a little poorly ground farina should be heated with salt; all these wrapped in a cloth are to be compressed on the teeth for a while, especially on those where the injury or trouble with the pain is felt severely. Finally white frankincense and the kind of ointment we call [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md) are burnt over the coals, with the odor whereof a coarse pad of cotton is impregnated, and then is kept moving frequently between the cheeks, so as best to reach the pain spot.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/28](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/28)  

## Subchapter 6a  
**Against the hiccups.** For the hiccups take the root of the bush cohuatli, leaves of the plant [mexix-quilitl](Mexix-quilitl.md), bark of the red pine, leaves of the aromatic [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md) plant, grind them in water and boil them; when well boiled mix white honey and let him drink moderately. Throw white frankincense and [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md) on the coals, soaking a pad of cotton with the odor, and with which the chest is to be heated. Leaves of cypress also, with the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md) and [yyauhtli](Y-yauhtli.md), are to be macerated in water, with the heated liquor whereof the chest is to be rubbed.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/36](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/36)  

## Subchapter 8j  
**Lesions in the feet.** For cut feet prepare these herbs: [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [coyo-xihuitl](Coyo-xihuitl.md), [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), [tepe-chian](Tepe-chian.md), [a-chilli](A-chilli.md), [xiuh-ecapatli](Eca-patli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [quetzal-xoxouhca-patli](Quetzal-xoxouca-patli.md), [tzotzotlani](Quetzal-xoxouhca-patli_tzotzotlani.md), the flower of the [cacau-xochitl](Cacaua-xochitl.md) and the [piltzin-tecouh-xochitl](Piltzinte-couh-xochitl.md), with the leaves of the [eca-patli](Eca-patli.md) and the [itzcuin-patli](Itzquin-patli.md), the stones [tlacal-huatzin](tlacal-huatzin.md), [eztetl](eztetl.md) and [tetlahuitl](tetlahuitl_v2.md), pale colored earth. Then divide all this into three parts. Put some in a basin over the coals or fire that it may heat, in water, and put the feet into the hot water in the basin. Let the fire placed at the feet lower somewhat, that it may not fall onto them; the feet are to be wrapped in a cloth. The following day put our ointment called [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), with white frankincense, into the fire, that the feet may improve by the odor and the heat; also let the seeds of the herb called [xe-xihuitl](Xe-xihuitl.md) be ground up and put pulverized into hot water to apply to the feet. Third, apply the herb[tolohua-xihuitl](Tolohua_xihuitl.md)and brambles ground up in hot water.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/65)  

## Subchapter 9q  
**Those struck by lightning.** Let one struck by a thunderbolt drink a potion well prepared from leaves of trees, namely the [ayauh-quahuitl](Ayauh-quahuitl.md), [tepaquilti quahuitl](tepaquilti_quahuitl.md), very green cypress, the bush [iztauh-yatl](Iztauyattl.md), the herbs[quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md) and [te-amoxtli](Te-amoxtli.md). But however the drink is to be given, let it be heated.  Let the body also be anointed with a plaster made of the herbs [papalo-quilitl](Papalo-quilitl.md), [tlal-ecapatli](Tlal-ecapatli.md), [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md), [tlatlanquaye](Tlatlanquaye.md), huitbitzil xochitil, [iztac-oco-xochitl](Iztac_oco-xochitl.md), and in addition all the plants upon which the lightning struck. A few days later lethim drink water into which white frankincense is thrown. The water is boiled with white and whitish incense, with the burned bones of a fox added. Also mix some Indian wine with the above. Afterwards you will instill into the nostrils a medicine made of white pearl, the root [tlatlacotic](Tlatlacotic.md), and all plants growing in a garden that has been burned over. Let also be suffumigated by white incense thrown upon the coals, the wax ointment we call [xochi-oco-tzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md), and the good odor of the herb [quauh-yyauhtli](Quauh-yyauhtli.md).  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/91)  

## Subchapter 10k  
**The traveler’s protection.** The dried flowers [meca-xochitl](Meca-xochitl.md), [tlil-xochitl](Tlil-xochitl.md), [huey-nacaztli](Huey-nacaztli.md), the bark of the trees [copal-xocotl](Copal-xocotl.md) and [atoya-xocotl](Atoya-xocotl.md), the leaves of the [a-xocotl](A-xocotl.md) tree, white incense, the salve [xochi-ocotzotl](xochi-ocotzotl.md) and[yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md), thus crushed and pulverized; then crushed placed within the cavity of the well-known and most fragrant [huacal-xochitl](Huacal-xochitl.md) flower, that they may receive the very redolent odor of this flower, and breathe it out. Then take at the end the highly praised flower [yollo-xochitl](Yollo-xochitl.md), which you must nicely hollow out and therein cover up the health bearing fine powder, suspending the capsule from the neck.  
[https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/104](https://archive.org/details/aztec-herbal-of-1552/page/104)  

